good evening this is the international
report produced by internews
i'm bannon garrett tonight we have a
special program on the 26th anniversary
of the founding of the people's republic
of china
with me tonight are two americans who
were deeply involved in the developments
in china during the 1930s and 40s
prior to liberation jim white and john's
service
jim white went to china and then in 1932
as an exchange student to yenjing
university
later he taught english and journalism
at yenjing and from 1936 to 1941
he was an associated press reporter in
peking after a stay in washington during
the war jim returned to china for
several months in 1948 and 49
during the last days of the nationalist
regime john service was born and raised
in west china
in the west china province sichuan by
his missionary parents
after attending oberlin college he
returned to china in 1935 and was
commissioned as
foreign service officer i traveled
widely going to the field to report
on on for the embassy on everything from
what warlords and the price of rice
to the chinese communist party which was
his specialty
in july 1944 he had the rare opportunity
to travel to yemen
the headquarters of the chinese
communist party as part of the us army
observer section
of the the dub the dixie mission jack
spent several months in yeon on
observing life in the communist areas
holding many discussions with communist
leaders including
you can correct me on pronunciations and
on the basis of his observations and
interviews jack made reports and policy
recommendations
to the us government he warned of the
dangers of the u.s policy of supporting
only the zhang shek regime during the
war against japan and
in the coming renewed civil war in china
jack's prophetic reports about half of
which have now been collected in a
paperback loss chance in china
where ammunition used against him in the
mccarthy period and even earlier in the
right-wing campaign to find a scapegoat
for america's failure in china
jack returned to china in 1971 and again
this year
when jack and caroline service spent
three months
in peking and then touring many areas of
china
so may we just start uh jim maybe you
can describe
what it was like to be in china in the
mid-1930s what were the conditions what
was the uh
maybe a little the contrast between what
it was like for workers and peasants and
what it was like for kmt officials and
commercial interests yes i think that
most of us were impressed by
two things one was the vast difference
between
the um controlling classes and the
peasants the standard of living of the
people the vast majority of the people
was abysmally low
and the there was really a very small
minuscule bourgeois element between them
and the
what would would be called the ruling
class and the ruling class generally was
a very rich ruling class because it was
very small the wealth was very
concentrated
the other thing i think that most of us
remember was the
the fact that the japanese were invading
and
that nobody was really doing anything
about it
i think the strategy of the nationalist
government was to
to stall and to get this country
involved
as much as it could and
in that sense they succeeded but
they weren't doing anything about the
the japanese invaders and
it remained for the communists to
really make an appeal to the people and
get it across
on the basis of resistance to the
japanese
what was it like sitting in peking in
terms of the way the
communists were presented uh the image
in the uh
as both as a reporter and just for the
average person in peking yeah well uh
during that period the uh campaigns
against communists were going forward in
jiangxi and other provinces in south and
central china
and when we had vague stories and
reports about
great massacres of the the masses of
people who were rallying around the
communists
but never very much confirmation
and so it came
as a considerable enlightenment to most
people when ed snow actually visited the
red areas in 1935 and 36 and
and came back with something like a
realistic story
i remember one thing it was very
characteristic of that time
the uh guomendang officials of the
central government
uh usually through the central news
agency uh periodically put out reports
that mao zedong had been killed in
battle or joe and lai had been killed in
battle or lindber
lindau or
you name it any general was almost every
month at least some communist general
was killed in battle
and of course there was never any
confirmation it got to the point where
actually one communist general was
killed in battle a man named leo zadon
and nobody believed it just like they
didn't believe any of the other reports
and it wasn't until years later that we
found out that leo zudon actually had
been killed
well what was the impact at this time of
ed snow's
reports well it was it was it had a
tremendous impact because here was a man
who'd actually gone there and come back
and ed was well known he was respected
honest man
and people believed him especially the
chinese
they had tremendous effect on them it
was quickly translated into chinese and
and pirated of course i mean the book
had to be distributed
more or less underground in chinese as i
understand it
how were the uh the communists being
presented in the u.s
press at this time well i wasn't here so
but uh i did see
some american magazines at that time and
um was not
as twisted as one might expect
it was simply that they didn't take the
communists very seriously
they didn't realize what a tremendous uh
advance the chinese communists had made
in their
in a working out a formula to appeal to
the masses of the people
right well john uh of course you
traveled all over
china and maybe you'd like to comment a
bit on the the conditions that uh
that you saw you know before you went to
yin another in the kmt and the japanese
occupied areas
well conditions in the
goldman down control areas were
can only be described as very bad
they didn't have any
system of of rationing they had a very
cruel
and corrupt system of conscription
the war was very unpopular the troops
really supported themselves by robbing
the people the areas in which they were
stationed
and by 1944 it was perfectly clear to
the people in chongqing the gomandang
that
in effect the united states was going to
win the war and they were simply
sitting things out there was tremendous
inflation
this bred corruption in every sphere
because
it encouraged people to hoard and to buy
up goods which
raised prices even more it was
you could make more money by hanging on
onto commodities such as cotton yarn
than you could by
manufacturing in the cloth and things
like that and it was a sort of a vicious
circle
the whole whole life in china on this
question of inflation that we
now hear about the reports that seem so
outrageous in chile for example 400
percent a year but the
time period you're talking about is even
vastly greater inflation than that isn't
it oh vastly greater
i forget uh of course by the time it
ended why the inflation rate was
measured in millions but by the time
that i'm talking about
it was something like four or five
hundred times what it had been pre-war
because the government was supporting
itself by
its own printing presses and by buying
money which was printed in america and
flown over the home
[Laughter]
bringing the supplies well did you were
you able to visit any of the japanese
occupied areas i imagine that would be
rather difficult for an american
no although people who were with the
dixie mission of course went behind the
japanese lines into north china they
went uh
all the way across north china to quite
close to peking
behind the japanese lines of course they
had to cross railways that were held by
the japanese and things like that
but although i was quite eager i was
told
to stay in yenan and maintain contact
with the communist leaders who were in
yen
and at that time chairman mao and joe
and lai and the rest of the leaders
there
well maybe we should talk then about the
contrast was from going from the
guamandang areas into you know and what
was uh
i know that must be quite a contrast and
uh be
real interesting to hear yes uh banning
it was sort of a
contrast almost between night and day or
black and white or we want to call it
i think the contrast that surprised us
most and we really didn't know what to
expect of course when we went up we'd
read books like ed snow's
red star over china and there had been
other people
that had gotten into yen and in 1938
but it had been completely blockaded by
the gomendong since 39 so there's been
five years of isolation
and of course reports and so on filtered
through and
there were chinese communist
representatives in chongqing and we
heard some things from them but we
tended to
discount those as being sort of uh
partial and prejudiced
so we really didn't have an idea of what
to expect when we got to yen and i think
what really surprised us most
was the tremendous air of confidence
they had almost nothing in the way of
material things they had nothing in the
way of arms
they'd receive no equipment from us or
from the gomandang
or from the soviet union their arms are
mostly what they could
capture from the japanese or manufacture
themselves very simple
the life was very simple they were
living on mar and on
millet and and things like that but the
confidence that they were on the winning
side that they were going ahead
was simply staggering and furthermore
their whole emphasis was on doing
something
in chung king as i mentioned before it
was on sitting and waiting
in yemen they realized that they were
getting stronger as the war went on
as they opposed the japanese and took
territorial towns away from the japanese
it expanded their own areas
made them stronger so the whole emphasis
was on action
on doing something and of course this
was just what we wanted
we said we at that time we were fighting
in japan and this was
uh wonderful wonderful stuff to see
somebody that was willing to
get in there and do something well in a
minute we uh maybe we can turn to u.s
policy with regards to the the
chinese communist party and the guam and
on but maybe go on more on the
sort of life in in the areas in terms of
uh just human relationships um
between leaders in the uh and might see
the masses of people among men and women
that kind of thing that
you know particularly coming from a very
hierarchical and authoritarian
society and on the other side of what
very strong class divisions
with people what were your impressions
in the communist areas
well this again impressed us very much
because there was so little
of pomp and ceremony uh
they used to have dances every saturday
night over
in an orchard a peach orchard at uh
party headquarters
uh there was a sort of a makeshift
orchestra
partly chinese instruments partly
western mostly out of tune
uh we play they would play a foxtrot and
a waltz and then a chinese
uh sort of adaption of chinese folk
dance called the yango
and it was quite a thing to see chairman
mao and
judah sort of a bear a great big man who
was the commander-in-chief of the
communist armies
there were more men than ladies but the
ladies used to take the initiative if
they felt like it and you'd see a nurse
in the international peace hospital to
go up and ask chairman mao for a dance
and he would smile and get up and dance
with her and so on
and we all thought this was great sport
but if chairman mao
wanted to come and see us he just came
to see us as there may have been a
security man somewhere in the background
but
he was never obvious but uh you might
have anybody from the whole
communist party walk into the little uh
sort of compound where our dixie mission
group was stationed for about
30 people i suppose and sit down for a
talk and
uh maybe stay for a meal and then walk
on home
it was a small village uh sort of a
little bit like a
church uh summer conference from a
religious group
everyone was very friendly to everyone
else
there was no no sort of uh
fancy living for anybody and
they didn't say they say stay brother
they said comrade of course but
there was no using of fancy titles
did the officers for example where marx
distinguishing them from the
troops no but you could usually tell
which uh
i think that they probably had the same
system then as that they do now that
uh enlisted man has two pockets on his
jacket an officer has four pockets on
his jacket
you can easily couch you know what's the
difference between a lieutenant in
general
no no more podcasts and as a matter of
fact in those days the general might be
quite young lynn bell himself was a
pretty young man in those days
so that you couldn't tell by the gray
hairs whether a man was a general or not
what was your impression of mal and joe
and lyon
and the leaders themselves
well mao was obviously a first among
equals and they all were very equal
and open frank
among themselves
i think mao was a very very impressive
person
he had some habits very noticeably
of usually letting other people if
you're in a group or a meeting
discussion
he would encourage other people to talk
draw them out
very often he would be the man to sort
of sum up which he would do in a
very very competent way of summarizing
the views or expressing his sort of
conclusion joe and i is much more
sort of tense much more dramatic much
quicker
sharper in his reactions in his
conversation
chairman mao is is rather serene rather
calm
rather sits back and lets you say and
then he will say he doesn't interrupt
and stop you
joe and lai is is apt to sort of jump in
if he sees a point that he can take
advantage over he wants to emphasize
judo was just a kindly old farmer
very very pleasant very very friendly
chinese have different uh
should we say different uh social
customs
and it's quite common in china to see
men holding hands and i've sat the whole
evening
to a theatrical performance with judah
holding my hand which
i was embarrassed about it first but
then realized was nothing to be
embarrassed about
but he's just a very kindly person when
he used to talk about
the communist ideas of guerrilla warfare
where the fish people see how he must
depend on the people and so
on you could see his eyes shine i mean
this was something that he really
believed in
something that that he was convinced of
uh
lin bien was a much colder person and he
said many of the same things
but he said them in a rather matter of
fact rather calm way
in other words his eyes didn't shine
you realize that he was saying these
things because this was the only
practical way they could operate
somebody like judah was doing it because
this is right
and it was a very marked contrast um
of course is dead now he was the
commander of the new fourth army
volatile uh liked to talk
a bit of a of a spinner of yarns very
good fun
he was a fellow provincial of mine he
was also from born in citron
and he actually had known my father
slightly the ymca in chengdu
where he probably learned ping pong like
a lot of other chinese did
hollom was a bluff hearty person
near pang de waa was the same sort of a
bluff person
oh niron jen who the atomic energy at
that time as the head of the jin chaji
area
had studied in france a real real
gentleman
but they were very very impressive group
of leaders
in every way what would you say they had
in common i mean you've described very
individual personalities and
types of reactions well they obviously
had
something in common which was
tremendously important and that was a
vision of a new china
they were all members of the party they
had given their lives most of their
adult lives to their party
underground fighting in jiangxi the long
marks these men were all
most of them on a long march cheney for
instance had been left behind to fight a
rearguard action and keep
keep resistance alive in jiangxi but the
rest of them had gone through a great
deal together
but they were convinced that they could
bring about
a new future for the people of china and
it was a
as i said earlier a faith that gave them
just an
incredible sense of confidence one of
the things that
strikes me in reading that your
dispatches is that
a person not too familiar with china
might think that on the one hand you
have people who
might have a very uh almost parochial
sense about their particular area or
whatever
in china not have tremendous knowledge
on the other hand the tremendously
abstract
theories but in fact from reading your
dispatches
you get the impression from miles
interviews that
here's a man with a tremendous practical
sense and realistic sense about the
world tremendous knowledge about
even the united states about the soviet
union about
basically the world situation a real
grasp of it an ability to
comprehend its subtleties it was quite
surprising and this is another thing
that surprised us
uh here they had been holed up in north
china for
they'd arrived there in 36 and this was
eight years later
with no contact with the outside world
but uh
the radio of course was available to
them and it's a great thing
and they picked up news from the world
and
they got newspapers of course from uh
chung king and the the gomendang area
and they also got magazines and
newspapers from the japanese occupied
cities
and books were scarce but they treated
them as very valuable and
preserved and carefully and they did
know a good deal about the world more
than we
expected them to know maybe uh maybe
it's interesting for people to hear
about what the
the life had how life had changed for
the average person in these areas
which of course would be mostly peasants
and uh and maybe
merchants etc in these vast areas that
have been uh
liberated by the communist party but of
course were so inaccessible practically
to
to anyone else from the outside well
it's it's a little hard to generalize
on that because so many of the areas
were subject to japanese
attacks japanese raids japanese
campaigns
in other words most of the areas they
held were guerrilla areas and there was
active warfare going on
perhaps every year once or twice or
sometimes
not for two years but they were they
were attacked
several times during the war and of
course this
brought tremendous suffering destruction
the japanese campaigns were ruthless
against the guerrillas they had a
campaign of
destroy all burn all and so on
this raised morale he gave it to the
charlie they gave the people
something to fight for and they found
out
that the communists were willing to
fight for them were on their side which
is something new in china
uh they weren't used to armies that uh
acted that way in china
and uh so there was a tremendous uh
sort of morale against the japanese
militant morale in most of the japanese
in most of the communist-held areas
and then there was a great deal done
also
to help the peasants in the way of
reducing taxes
reducing land rents of encouraging
production in every way they could
because these areas were blockaded both
by the japanese and the gomandang and
they began to be self-sufficient
so there was a lot of
propaganda and energy and incentives to
developing production so that most of
these areas were
relatively quite prosperous more
prosperous
than we had expected and the peasants
and farmers are better off
than they were in the woman down areas
by and large and despite the war
did the communists give the peasants a
kind of confidence that it really had
been lacking in the
among the peasantry anyway in china for
so many centuries yeah
well it wasn't so much the the peasants
in gomandang china had
lacking confidence is just being ignored
they were simply regarded
as a force there to be exploited to be
forced to produce grain
to be forced to produce conscripts they
were never brought into the war they
were never given any feeling
that this war was their war that they
had an interest in fighting it
and of course this was very different in
in the communist areas and it was easier
for the communists to be perfectly fun
about it because the japanese were there
they were much closer
the gwoman down there is the the enemy
was far away and uh how could the poor
chinese peasant
visualize but if the japanese
had actually raided your village and
grabbed your wheat and burned your house
and raped your wife why you had the
personal stake in the war
that to be honest was lacking in a lot
of the women dung areas
one of the things that i think most
americans probably aren't
really aware of is that uh contrary to
the impression that
i think most people realize that the
chinese communist party was no puppet of
moscow but i think
it was only 172 that it came out that at
this period
now in 4445 during the war mao
and joe and lai offered to come to
washington to to meet with
president roosevelt and discuss the
common war effort
and really were much more open to
relations and good relations with the
united states than i think was ever
given credit for publicly
well that's quite true the united states
is tremendously important to them
and it was vital to them both in the war
during the war and in the period after
the war
to find out what american policy was and
how they stood with american is
with the united states they were
confused
uh quite understandably because
when we when the dixie mission was sent
to yemen
in july 1944
it was thought that if the communist
forces
could be useful that we would try to
cooperate with them and bring them into
the war effort
thinking in washington apparently
changed
patrick j hurley was sent out to china
and then eventually became ambassador
and he was convinced that the most
american most important american
objective was to
support maintain the position of jian
kai-shek
and so he changed the whole attitude and
thinking about the possibility of
cooperating with the communists it
couldn't be thought of he said unless
the architect was going to agree and
obviously chiang kai-shek was neither
going to agree to the americans
supporting his
most bitter enemy and rivals for power
so by the time by the beginning of 1945
the communists were really perplexed and
worried and this was the period when
they
asked when they put out feelers to see
whether or not
president roosevelt would let them come
to the states to so they could find out
on the horse's mouth so to speak because
just to what american policy really was
because it was very mixed up at that
time well the policies that evolved if
i'm
correct me if i'm wrong was to continue
to support uh zhang kai-shek and in fact
really even the the way the war ended
to aid zhang's troops and occupying the
areas that
the japanese had occupied after they
were defeated and to what was it
something like over two billion dollars
in military equipment eventually went to
the
gomandang by 49 into
uh although atchison and the
truman government was attacked for not
having gone all out to save china in
fact uh
zacherson defends himself uh if you want
to call it
defending um they did go all out to do
everything they could it's short of a
military intervention
by u.s troops which of course in
retrospect of vietnam you can imagine
what it'd be like with 800 million
or whatever 600 million chinese people
to uh to fight against at that time
so that the the policy did become clear
and uh an opportunity
as i think you foresaw it yourself at
that time to
to play a very different role in the
future of china and of course china
the world might have been quite
different in terms of korea and vietnam
if the us had uh had in fact
played a neutral role and not to
encourage this civil war not encourage
what you saw as to be a completely
losing attempt by zhang to try to crush
the communist party there was no way
they could do it and to back that was a
disaster because
i believe as you as you wrote it would
only lead to forcing
the communists away from the united
states and of course be a defeat in the
in the
in the process as well well that's quite
correct
uh what was back of american policy of
formation american policy that time i
think has never been completely
explained
we simply don't know the answers
apparently it's related to
the american concern to have russia
participate in the war
against japan and apparently also i
think
in roosevelt's mind the desirability of
trying to build a basis for
some russian americans post-war
cooperation sort of a daytime with the
soviet union
at any rate uh in february 1945 at yalta
of course
president roosevelt secretly uh gave
away
chinese rights and prerogatives in
manchuria and in return
got a promise from stalin that he would
support only the central government
this was a secret agreement even the
state department didn't know about until
months later
we in china of course didn't know about
it but
this obviously is part of the background
of the decision to have nothing whatever
to do with the chinese communists
since we had gotten stalin to agree that
he would have nothing to do with anyone
except the central government
well jim maybe you could just briefly
describe what it was like
to be back in china in 48 and 49 the
last days of the dying
gasps of the guoman dong yes i went back
in the
autumn of 1948 after it became obvious
that the
well actually uh genon had fallen
and manchuria had gone earlier and so on
it was obvious it was just a question of
time and terms
um before the whole thing collapsed and
i was never able to get up into the
communist
controlled areas but i did visit
shanghai nan king canton and thai bay
and um in spite of the
euphoria that always persists around a
national capital
like nan king it was perfectly obvious
that everyone was just
just stalling i mean just biding their
time trying to
figure out how to get out uh what's the
best thing to do
how can we save this that and the other
and people were leaving in droves for
uh taiwan already and
uh i actually and at the same time the
i think that one thing that made
nationalist morale collapse faster than
anything else was
the uh it was the gold yuan at that time
that
the nationalist government floated
they revalued the currency and got the
uh
what small bourgeois class there was in
places like shanghai to
to invest in this to turn in their old
currency and buy the new currency and
then it
took the lid off and inflation went off
again at a great gallop and it was
almost as bad as it had been
before the war and that that uh
that really finished uh the nationalists
in my opinion
on the mainland in addition to all the
other factors that were at work
uh i actually i interviewed a couple of
bankers
one in shanghaine one in canton chinese
and they actually pounded on the table
both of them and without my and
uh encouraging them in any way i mean i
was just asking what what do you think
about the communists
what are you going to do they said let
them come on it can't be
can't possibly be any worse than things
already are
because they had they'd seen their own
clients
uh cheated out of their their life
savings and that sort of thing and it
just got
it was one more blow too many and just
reached a point of complete rot
right yeah well maybe uh in the last
part of the program we only have a
few minutes left but uh jack you can
describe what it's like in china today
what are the changes over a 30
40 year period that you you can see now
after spending uh
well two visits three months the last
time traveling almost one end of china
to the other
well i think to someone who lived in
china
in the sort of bad old days i
lived there from 1909 on shall we say
through 1945 pretty much
the thing that hits you strikes you when
you come to china now is
that you come to a country that is
unified
that it's a going concern it's a modern
state
this is a feeling you never had in the
old china the warlord china was
split up and separate and the government
in peking or nan king where it was
had no real power governed only a part
of it but now
you know right away that you're coming
to a country that
really has become a country this
is this and many other things uh
are responsible for a whole new attitude
of people
a spirit they obviously had a tremendous
experience in in political movements and
political training
in the campaigns they've gone through
but uh it's certainly the part that
that's
certainly what's happened to china is a
part of what gives people when you see
them on the street
of an air of confidence of self-respect
inside the country uh there is a new
spirit of egalitarianism
certainly as the top leaders have their
motor cars and they live in a better
house and so on they've got percocets
but in dress and in manner and in
approach to other people there's a
surprising
equality which wasn't there before no
one
has any need to be servile or humble or
obsequious
the man who waits on you in the hotel
dining room
or that looks after your room uh he
talks to you
straight and direct as man-to-man
in a way that you would never meet in
china in the old days
of course the obvious things that people
speak about
people are better clothed better fed
no more beggars no more poverty streets
are clean
and so on but i think it's a real change
that's more deep than that in china
the fact that uh in the old days perhaps
10 percent of people
who were or educated or literate
uh now nowadays it's probably just
reversed
probably 90 percent are literate from
the only illiterates are quite old
people
who never had a chance to go to school
but all the children go to school now
it's been a tremendous job of the
country 600 million or
800 million or perhaps even 900 million
no one knows
well what was it like to meet some of
your old friends like joe and ly when
you
met him again in 1971 after all those
years had he changed what was the uh
what was your impression of that meeting
yes of course he changed uh he was uh
26 or 7 years older but also when you've
been
in a position of power as he has
it obviously leaves some some some
changes some marks
i don't mean that these are unpleasant
but he obviously now is a person
who is used to having his words given
great weight and having people
jump when he's asked for something and
so on
if he says something now i it's done
very quickly it's very different from
the
informal days of yeah
but the sharpness the mental alertness
the sort of
rapier-like quickness of mind is still
there it was very
i was very impressed in 71. of course i
didn't see him at 75 because his health
is too bad
he's not able to see very many people
now in fact recently apparently he seems
to be seeing even fewer people
most of my other friends are very old
now
or very high very hard to see chairman
mao only sees a few
people usually visiting chiefs of state
some have died like changi uh
jung i still went to a memorial service
for him while i was there
uh we did see madame sonyatsen my wife
and i
and that was a very pleasant reunion i
hadn't seen her since chung king
1944 and 45. she will she's
fairly well uh she had had a fall and
she was
walking with a cane and some assistance
but uh
her spirit is quite good did you know
deng xiaoping
uh no i didn't know dunk jumping i don't
think that he was in
uh yen and i think that he was left
behind to sort of
be in charge he was their deputy to
chinese and since chennai
was in yemen where they were waiting for
the uh party congress
i believe that deng xiaoping was still
in the new fourth army area so you have
no particular perspective on him
no not without something what was it
like to return to your old home
in tituan well it was very nice
actually chengdu which is where i was
born and lived until i was about 10
i didn't really have as sharp memories
of as i did of chong king where i spent
four years during the war i think
probably going back to chongqing and
seeing a house where i lived there
during the war with
saul adler and so on to the treasury
department
i think that was probably more fun than
going to joe king
do i mean quite a few uh changes oh a
great many changes
right well i think that uh this is a
good place to end the program the
interview this is
uh bannon garrett of internews i've been
talking with jim white and jack
service about china and this has been
the international report